# Slow extraction theory

## Spiral step
https://cds.cern.ch/record/2650734/files/CERN-THESIS-2018-278.pdf
Particles which are on one arm of the separatrix in one turn will be on the counter clockwise rotated arm in the next turn. Particles return to the same arm every three turns, but always a little further from the middle than earlier. If we track the phase space position of one unstable particle it seems like if it were “walking” outwards with increasing steps. The so-called spiral step is an important parameter of the slow extraction. Assume a particle which is just barely on the circulating side of the wires in one turn, then three turns later it is the extracted particle which is furthest away from the origin. The difference between the particle’s x coordinates in this turn and 3 turns later is called the spiral step. In other words, this is the length of the section on which particles are extracted or lost

# PS Tune control
email from Marc Delrieux on 10.10.2022

Here are a few explanations about the tune control during the slow extraction. Please let me know if you have any other questions. The PS tune control is a complicated topic which could require a several hours training, so I hope I'll manage to summarize in a short and useful way…any comment by Matthew is welcome !

Born in 1959, the PS is a so-called combined function magnets synchrotron. It is composed of 100 Main Units, which are NOT dipoles but alternating focusing and defocusing semi-quadrupoles. In a more recent machine, the dipolar component is given by dedicated dipoles, the quadrupolar component by dedicated quadrupoles. In the PS, simply by powering the main magnets, we ramp together the dipolar and quadrupolar parts, which was a very nice idea in the 60s, but which makes our operators lives very complicated in 2022. In practice, in order to actually control the quadrupolar, sextupolar and octupolar components in a more independent way, 5 extra windings were added on the poles of the magnets : the so-called Pole Face Windings (PFW). The PS also has a set of 20 focusing + 20 defocusing dedicated quadrupoles, which are very nice, but work only at low energies and are therefore called Low Energy Quadrupoles (LEQ).

Regarding the 3rd order resonant slow extraction we use for the EAST AREA beams, the horizonal tune needs to be set at 6.33 and the resonance is driven by extra sextupoles (namely XSE - Sextupoles for Slow Extraction). The 6.33 tune is obtained by a combination of the Main Units (POPS !) current, the PFW currents (which are required to reach 24 GeV/c, in particular since we have to cross transition) and two extra quadrupoles powered in series, the QSE (Quadrupoles Slow Extraction). The PFW have very strong non-linearities when the beam is radially moved to an off-centre orbit, the QSE are misaligned (and we don't understand why), so on a nominal 24 GeV/c slow extraction we have a lot of non-linear things happening, which indeed affect the spill quality and which are not easy to compensate.

With ions at lower energies, we could use the same components (PFW, QSE) to control the tune, but we manage to accelerate to the (low) flat top without the PFW (in particular with ions, we don't have to cross transition for the reduced energies), and the 6.33 tune can be reached and controlled by the Low Energy Quadrupoles + QSE only, so it is nice to get rid of such a non-linear component : the scaling to lower energies is much easier. It would also be nice to manage to slow extract without the QSE ; I tried this without success last week. I think this is the QSE are not only used to change the tune but also the optics (Dispersion and Beta twiss function).